*Notes toward a digital assistant. Status: conceptual*

---

I want to make a chatbot version of a bullet journal. The bullet journal was possibly the most effective method for me, but I stopped using it. I didn't use all the features of it, but some of them were really important: daily review of the leftover tasks from yesterday, and consideration of the tasks of today; a visual representation of success so that I could feed myself dopamine when I get things done; an externalized representation of progress, that I could look back on. I only occasionally used the weekly/monthly planning features. I didn't find that my schedue had that much forward thinking going on. Most of my projects work on explorer time, not farmer time.

Calendars aren't as useful to me, because you have to think to look at the calendar every day even though the events only happen every so often. More powerful is a reminder system -- like a reminder I use to take out the trash every Tuesday night. This is the principle that Google Calendar uses: it gives you the Today function right up front, and uses notifications and reminders to carry information over the longer term. You don't scribble your whole day's worth of stuff into a little box exactly the same size as the other boxes. You have a magic paper (a Material, if you will) that carries information through from page to page. You write it once, and it connects to all the place where it's needed and appears in a little zone where it belongs.

This visual, textural vision of time works for the kind of things you get paid to put on your calendar. But it's too involved for many of the things that we do every day or every week: take out the trash, do the laundry, food prep, weed the garden. And it doesn't account at all for explorer time. It doesn't ask you "what problem are you solving today?" or "how does this activity fit into your larger plans?". It doesn't remind you of things you've done in the past, and how they reflect the things you're doing now. It's a queueing system for jobs, and why wouldn't it be? It's designed to do corporate operations efficiently. It's a human activity printer.

What I would prefer is sort of an artificial understudy: an inquiring mind who keeps track of what you're doing and why. Rather than the Personal Assistant model (where the AI is your hot secretary who keeps track of your appointments and subcontracts your chores), this is the Pair Programming model applied to real life. The human being is "driving", but the AI is observing and navigating in partnership. An ever-present mirror. A shadow. A novice:

> Expert–novice pairing creates many opportunities for the expert to mentor the novice. This pairing can also introduce new ideas, as the novice is more likely to question established practices. The expert, now required to explain established practices, is also more likely to question them. However, in this pairing, an intimidated novice may passively "watch the master" and hesitate to participate meaningfully. Also, some experts may not have the patience needed to allow constructive novice participation. -- [Pair Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pair_programming)

So the novice will basically be a chatbot, with memory and scheduling abilities. It will ask questions about what you're up to, remind you what you said you would do, guess at things you might do rhythmically and reward you for doing things. It will have to think in terms of a graph, probably: different nodes, related with bidirectional links. A knowledge database. But with NLP those things should be relatively easy to extract. If we record them long enough, the patterns within should start to be visible in the graph. Basically like a question-answer interface to Obsidian or Roam.

Chatbots need a domain in which they live. A domain includes user intents and bot actions. A subset of bot actions is response, which defines what the bot action "returns" to the conversation.

The difference between a novice and a personal assistant is that the novice asks questions. The PA is on a need-to-know status, taking direction from the executive, fulfilling small side quests so the executive can Focus on Thinking Big Thoughts. But thinking big thoughts is a whole different discipline from Planning and Executing Tasks. Wiki again:

>While reviewing, the observer also considers the "strategic" direction of the work, coming up with ideas for improvements and likely future problems to address. This is intended to free the driver to focus all of their attention on the "tactical" aspects of completing the current task, using the observer as a safety net and guide.

If you had a little kid following you about your day (a very smart little kid), asking you to explain yourself, and taking copious notes (ooh, amanuensis, or anamnesis) and holding you accountable to the things you said you would do, wouldn't that help your day? If the kid was smart enough, or humble enough, to not get in the way? A little angel on your shoulder, an exosuperego. A cool head in the navigator's seat. "It looks like you're getting into an argument on Twitter. Is that what you want to feel right now?"

Novice. The app that takes notes on you.
